# Roadmap

## Contribution areas

NWheels project would benefit from contributions in many different areas:

- **Kernel**: maintain and enhance _NWheels Kernel_, which is the main module that provides common base services critical to any application.
- **Architecture**: contribute _programming models_ and define interfaces with _technology adapter_ modules. This includes documentation, examples, and sample applications.
- **Technology stacks**: construct technology stacks, and contribute _technology adapter_ module for them.
- **Domains**: contribute _domain building block_ modules for common business domains, e.g. e-commerce, CRM, booking, trading, and many more.
- **UX**: contribute technology stacks related to user interaction platforms, including their corresponding _technology adapter_ modules.
- **Creatives**: this includes technical writing, graphics design and UX themes/variations, voice/music, advertisement.

#### On top of the above, we are especially interested in contributions to these areas:

- **Application Security**
  - analyzing source code, DevOps toolchain, and runtime environments generated by NWheels
  - analyzing threats and defining mitigations
  - discovering and fixing vulnerabilities
  - consluting on best application security practices  
- **Artificial Intelligence**
  - contributing programming models that integrate artificial intelligence in enterprise applications. 
  - architecting data collection for feeding AI models in reusable ways
  - contributing AI decisioning engines
  - expending UI programming models with AI-based interaction capabilities
- **Internet of Things** 
  - contributing specializations of UI programming models to different kinds of end-user devices
  - providing technology stack for direct communication with devices, or integration with device cloud platforms
  - contributing technology adapter modules for the above



